In this file we will explain what we did in the lab so far and
the difficulties on the way


Main Goal
filter non-relevant variants in cancer patients DNA sequencing


Approach:

comparing the haplotype inheritance in different families.
This way, we will only consider the variants in the areas where all the siblings/ children
have the same haplotype.
For example, say we have 3 cancer patients - a mother and her 2 children.
For simplicity, we will focus on chromosome 13 (chosen arbitrary).
Now, say that child 1 inherited haplotype 1 from position 1 to 30M in chromosome 13,
and inherited haplotype 2 from position 30M to the end of the chromosome (due to recombination)
In addition, child 2 inherited haplotype 2 from position 1 to 15M, and from position 35M to the
end of the chromosome, and inherited haplotype 1 from position 15M to 35M.
We want to create an algorithm that filters the chromosomes such that it will show us the
common haplotype inheritance - where in the example above, this area (in chromosome 13 as
mentioned), is from positions:
15M-30M for haplotype 1
35M-end of chromosome for haplotype 2.


Filtering Process & Example

The data given is DNA sequencing of cancer patients, which consists only from variants -
each row depicts information on a single variant, including the haplotype information for
each variant.
The haplotype information is in the following format:
1|0, 0|1, 1|1, 0|0 where 1|0 depicts heterozygous variant and 1|1 depicts homozygous variant.
The first filter - delete all the rows that the reference is homozygous (1|1 or 0|0), and
the non-reference are heterozygous.
This way we can determine which haplotype inherited, for example:
reference - 1|0 non-reference - 1|1, in this case the inheritance type is 1 (arbitrary number
to indicate that the reference inherited its left haplotype).
reference - 1|0 non-reference - 0|0, the inheritance type is 2.
The second filter deals with sequencing errors - for each variant, we check the haplotype
inheritance type (the numbers 1 or 2) of the next 19 variants. Only if 19 (out of 20) or
more variants are classified the same as the current variant, the variant won't be filtered out.


The Algorithm

After given a processed family file, the algorithm will split it to each of the chromosomes, and
analyze each of them separately, as mentioned above.
it will create directories containing the output data:
chromosomes - 23 files of the different chromosomes
haplotype_interval_tables - tables of all the chromosomes, and a merged excell file. The tables
and the file contain the information about the common haplotype locations in the non-reference
patients (children\ siblings).
interval_plots - plotted interval tables, a plot for each chromosome.


Problems & Solutions

Problem - the information regarding the haplotype inheritance can be mixed - the haplotype order
can be inverted in the given file, although in reality the haplotype shouldn't be inverted (there
was no recombination).
Solution - taking one of the patients, and assuming that the reference patient inherited one of
the haplotypes (in our case - haplotype 1). Afterward, inverting the reference patient's
information on haplotypes, such that it will be seen as the reference actually inherited only
haplotype 1 to one of the patients in his family. Then, we find the haplotype inheritance of all
the other cancer patients in the family, and compare the results.
What we will see - only the parts of the chromosome (haplotypes) that all the patients share.

Problem - the sequenced patients in some families are siblings and not mother-children, we don't
have a reference genome to compare haplotypes.
Solution - picking one of the siblings arbitrary as reference. In addition, we can change the
referenced sibling if needed.
